---
title: Jack London's Cold Truth
date: 2019-03-11
description: An essay profiling Jack London and his literary works.
type: essay
tags: ["English", "Literature"]
draft: true
---

Two different audiences hold the many works of Jack London to two different standards. The general audience has a passive, reserved respect for each of his famous well-crafted stories. Scholars instead have a very baffling inability to trust and understand the early twentieth-century author. A complete perspective of his stories and novels makes the difference. With many of his works outright contradicting each other, understanding the man behind the printed name on the cover is difficult, to say the least. The only way to understand a man like Jack London is to pull back the curtains on his life and beliefs, as London’s love of observation and learning defined his literary persona.

Born on <time datetime="1876-01-12">January 12, 1876</time>, John Griffith London grew up on California ranches until the age of nine, when his family moved to Oakland. He worked as an oysterman and bayman in the San Francisco Bay Area. At the age of 19, London entered the University of California (now UC Berkeley) but dropped out halfway through his freshman year due to a lack of financial support. London went to work in a laundry, writing in his spare time, until enticed by the promise of gold during the Yukon Gold Rush in <time datetime="1897">1897</time>. He was one of the few that survived that winter but did not survive unscathed with a case of scurvy (Vitamin C deficiency). After failing to strike it rich, London and a few campmates sailed the Bearing Sea. Upon his return to the Bay Area, London began writing full time. He married in <time datetime="1900">1900</time> to Elizabeth Maddern and had two daughters, Joan and Becky. He wrote <i>The Call of the Wild</i> during this time, published in <time datetime="1903">1903</time> to instant success. London later worked as a war correspondent in Korea during the Russo-Japanese War in <time datetime="1904">1904</time>. London would remarry in <time datetime="1904">1905</time> to Charmian Kittredge, who he would travel the world with on his personal yacht <i>Snark</i>. London would be a witness to the <time datetime="1906">1906</time> San Francisco Earthquake, the aftermath dramatically recounted in <i>The Story of an Eyewitness</i>. London would die of uremic poisoning on <time datetime="1916-11-22">November 22, 1916</time>, at the age of 40. His incredibly short life produced several works only London himself could have written due to the imaginative structures they contain. (“JACK LONDON”).

London’s works are incredibly dependent upon his own experiences. Most of his works are set in places of personal meaning, and therefore, his life very much had an impact on these works. Many of his novels are set in the Bay Area, but his most famous works are set in the far North. His detail is implausible. Early in <i>The Call of the Wild</i>, London goes out of his way to mention the <q>little flag station known as College Park</q> (London). The knowledge of the station’s existence, its name, and the fact that it was a request stop could only be from a local intimately familiar to its location in the Santa Clara Valley. The rest of the novel contains detailed location in the protagonist’s travels, mentioning geographic landmarks and cities including Dyea and Dawson in Alaska. These experiences and places helped London write his naturalistic works.

The naturalist movement influenced London’s works. <i>The Sea-Wolf</i> and <i>The Call of the Wild</i> both describe transitions from the civilized to the barbaric. These protagonists, Humphrey van Weyden in <i>The Sea-Wolf</i>, and Buck in <i>The Call of the Wild</i>, both have similar narratives containing the Übermensch philosophy created by German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche. Under Übermensch, a character who is usually the protagonist defies all odds through their individual strength and intellect. <i>The Sea-Wolf</i> throughout references the true intellectuals that supported this philosophy. The second sentence contains a reference to Nietzsche and Arthur Schopenhauer by name, along with Charles Darwin and Herbert Spencer later in the book, each supporting the philosophy. London, as an autodidact, <q>read widely in literature and philosophy, and was most profoundly influenced by the works of Herbert Spencer, Karl Marx, Kipling, and Friedrich Nietzsche</q> (“Jack London”). <i>The Iron Heel</i> brings Nietzsche into focus as well, but for a completely different reason.

A self-declared Socialist, Jack London makes his political alignment clear in his writings. Throughout his writings, he features the word ‘comrade’ frequently, including <i>The Sea-Wolf</i>, <i>The Call of the Wild</i>, <i>The Star Rover</i>, and <i>The Iron Heel</i>, an early modern dystopian novel published in 1907. Set then hundreds of years in the distant future, the Oligarchy had taken over the overall political system of the United States in the 1910s in response to a worldwide socialist revolution. The socialist movement had formed to overthrow capitalism, but the robber barons of the era became the Oligarchy to suppress the proletariat in effective serfdom. It is an interesting story, which has numerous similarities to midcentury works such as Vonnegut’s <i>Player Piano</i> (Hicks) and Orwell’s <i>Nineteen Eighty-Four</i> (Shelden). London heavily influenced Orwell, and Jack London himself was, therefore, before his time (Tharsing).

The problem is that, as James W. Tuttletown points out in The Hudson Review, these views are entirely incompatible, and cannot be combined without sacrificing each other. <q>He seems in one group of stories to be a very pessimistic naturalist glorifying force, brutality, the superman who survives all opposition, and the individualist who triumphs over nature and his social inferiors; and in the next he seems to be glorifying cooperation and the unity of the masses as an antidote to ‘rapacious individualism’ in politics, business, and the like</q> (Tuttletown and Leitz). This is what makes London so perplexing; the wide philosophical gap between stories is vast and jarring when attempting to determine his persona. London even contradicts himself as Judith S. Baughman, et al. point out, “London also declared that [<i>The Sea-Wolf</i> was] written to refute the doctrines of individualistic supermen, an argument many critics have been unable to reconcile upon examination of the texts.” They claim that because Wolf Larson shares London’s nickname, past, favorite authors, and philosophical beliefs, this cannot be true. Reflected in the key character is <q>…London’s insistence upon facing the reality that life is totally meaningless… Many critics consider these and other criteria unmistakable evidence of London’s admiration for Wolf Larsen</q> (“Jack London”).

One chief explanation for these structures is that London was often not writing of his own views in these stories, but instead was writing of what he witnessed around him. In <time datetime="1902">1902<time>, London traveled to the city of the same name, resulting in <i>The People of the Abyss</i> in <time datetime="1903">1903</time>. This non-fiction work described the depressing conditions of the East End of London, including its striking poverty. He did this by spending weeks living on the streets with impoverished families. London was not the first author to document the English slums—<i>The Condition of the Working Class in England</i> did so in <time datetime="1845">1845</time>. It would later inspire a young George Orwell in the 1930s to do the same with <i>Down and Out in Paris and London</i> and <i>The Road to Wigan Pier</i>. This was not an isolated event either.

Inspired by Edward Morrell and published in <time datetime="1915">1915</time>, <i>The Star Rover</i> is another one of these stories. A real inmate at San Quentin State Prison, Morrell’s stories of the jacket would inspire the central narrative of the story. The protagonist’s fellow inmate would bear his name, and through the intervention of London himself, pardoned Morrell for his crime. <i>The Star Rover</i> has multiple visions of the past connected by an underlying, soft science-fiction narrative. It is reminiscent of short story collections such as Isaac Asimov’s <i>I, Robot</i> (published in <time datetime="1950">1950</time>), but much more elaborate. This brings into picture London’s dependence on very short, simple storylines, and his inability to create more complex works.

Dale L. Walker, a scholar and writer, notes that London was at his best with short stories. Most of his novel-length works are poorly written or immensely flawed. Walker also notes the overwritten <i>White Fang</i> does not maintain audience interest at its length, composed of five parts of up to six chapters. London’s best works take advantage of episodic writing, seen in London’s autobiographic works of John Barleycorn. <i>The Call of the Wild</i>, though often sold as a novel, clocks in at below 25,000 words, and would fit much better in the novella category. <q>I see him as an uncomfortable novelist, that form too long for his natural impatience and the quickness of his mind; see him squirming over his novels and their requirements: a huge cast of characters to keep sorted out, an intricate plot with elements of real suspense and action, long descriptive passages, long passages of time, pages of dialogue, and some meaningful denouement—all requiring artful cohesion</q> (Walker). After reading the complete works of Jack London, Walker believes that novels were not London’s strength, and that it was instead his short-form stories that stood out.

<i>The Call of the Wild</i> and <i>White Fang</i> both have canine protagonists, but have completely different storylines and themes; Buck in <i>The Call of the Wild</i> transitions from captivity in the Santa Clara Valley to the toil of the trail in the far North because, according to London, <q>men had found a yellow metal in the far North, and because Manuel was a gardener’s helper whose wages did not lap over the needs of his wife and divers small copies of himself</q> (London). It was actual greed which leads to Buck’s adventures. But the eponymous <i>White Fang</i> is the opposite; a wolfdog (hybrid) born in the wild and pushed into civilization by greedy people including Native Americans and dog fighters, who ends up with his salvation by a wealthy California man. With themes of morality and redemption, <i>White Fang</i> represents the anthesis of <i>The Call of the Wild</i>’s themes of violence and primitivity.

The key works of Jack London are a mess of varying tones, philosophies, and narratives which prevent an obvious persona from existing. Though fascinated by naturalistic themes, they are not all encompassing of his works. Instead, it would be his love of incorporating what he saw in society himself and the works of his favorite philosophers and authors that would define his own persona, one that would inspire mid-century authors and people for generations.